Update proposal / voting documentation (#2877)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/daos/nns/proposal-voting.mdx

---
keywords: [intermediate, governance, concept, nns]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Voting on proposals

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Governance", "Concept"]} />

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Overview
```

> The NNS DAO is an open governance system where everyone can become a participant by staking some ICP in a neuron. Thus, any user can get voting rights by [staking some ICP in a neuron](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron) and locking the tokens for at least 6 months (called the neuron's dissolve delay).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NNS DAO is an open governance system where anyone can become a participant by [staking some ICP in a neuron](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron) and locking the tokens for at least 6 months. Locking tokens for a period of time is known as the neuron's dissolve delay.
```

## Finding proposals and discussions

> You can see all the NNS proposals on the [Internet Computer dashboard](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/governance) or on the [NNS dapp](https://nns.ic0.app/). Voters can freely discuss proposal anywhere they like. A lot of NNS proposals are discussed on the [developer forum](https://forum.dfinity.org/c/roadmap/29).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see all the NNS proposals on the [Internet Computer dashboard](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/governance) or on the [NNS dapp](https://nns.ic0.app/). Voters can freely discuss proposals anywhere they like. A lot of NNS proposals are discussed on the [developer forum](https://forum.dfinity.org/c/roadmap/29).
```

## Direct voting

> When a user has an eligible neuron and would like to vote on an open proposal, one option is to directly vote to adopt or reject the proposal. Currently, the most user-friendly way to first find the open proposals that a user can vote on and to then cast a vote is via the NNS Frontend dapp: https://nns.ic0.app/ as explained [here](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#vote-on-proposals).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user has an eligible neuron and would like to vote on an open proposal, one option is to directly vote to adopt or reject the proposal. Currently, the most user-friendly way to first find and [vote on open proposals](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#vote-on-proposals) is via the NNS Frontend dapp: https://nns.ic0.app/.
```

> ## Liquid democracy / Following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Liquid democracy (following)
```

> Users may not have the time or knowledge to participate in all voting decisions. Therefore, instead of directly voting on proposals, neuron holders may choose to delegate their vote to other neurons that they trust with certain decisions. This concept of delegating the right to vote to other voters who then effectively vote with more voting power is called **liquid democracy**. In the NNS DAO, this is also called **following**, as a neuron follows the decision of some other neurons. The liquid democracy allows even neurons that do not have enough knowledge of a certain topic to participate in governance by choosing the neurons that they trust with certain decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users may not have the time or knowledge to participate in all voting decisions. Therefore, instead of directly voting on proposals, neuron holders may choose to delegate their vote to other neurons that they trust with certain decisions. This concept of delegating the right to vote to other neurons, who then effectively vote with more voting power, is called **liquid democracy**. In the NNS DAO, this is also called **following**, as a neuron follows the decision of some other neurons.
```

### How to follow a neuron

> Concretely, proposals are grouped into different [**proposal topics**](./proposal-voting.mdx#Proposal topics and types) and following is done on a per-topic basis. Refer to [this documentation](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#neuron-following) for more information about how you can set up your neuron to follow a group of other neurons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concretely, proposals are grouped into different [**proposal topics**](./proposal-voting.mdx#proposal-topics-and-types) and following is done on a per-topic basis. Learn how you can set up your neuron to [follow a group of other neurons](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#neuron-following).
```

### How to find neurons to follow

> In order for some neurons to follow others, there need to be some voting neurons that can be followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for a neurons to follow others, there must be some neurons classified as 'voting neurons' that can be followed.
```

Author: Edited locally with a slight variant

> There are two ways how neurons to follow can be found and set in a neuron:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways neurons to follow can be found and set:
```

* A user with an actively voting neuron who is offering to be followed can communicate their neuron ID to others, for example on the forum or their website. Other neurons can then [follow them](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#step-5-enter-a-neuron-id-to-follow-or-select-a-group-of-neurons-from-the-menu-provided) using this neuron ID.

> * A user with an actively voting neuron who is offering to be followed can register a **known neuron**, also called **named neuron**, in the NNS governance canister. Neurons who would like to follow others can see a list of all registered neurons with their name and optionally a short description and can just select one of them to follow (without having to remember an ID).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A user with an actively voting neuron who is offering to be followed can register a **known neuron**, also called a **named neuron**, in the NNS governance canister. Neurons who would like to follow others can see a list of all registered neurons with their name and optionally a short description, and can then select one of them to follow (without having to remember an ID).
```

## How to become a known neuron
To become a known neuron in the NNS DAO, you first need to create a neuron and then submit an NNS proposal to register the known neuron in the NNS governance.
A know neuron has a name and optionally a short description.
After registering the known neuron, it will be visible to all NNS DAO users when they set up their following.
To convince the NNS DAO to accept a new known proposal and to provide more context for potential followers, it is
often useful for known neuron candidates to present themselves to the community already before submitting the proposal.

> ### Create a neuron - overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Overview of creating a neuron
```

> There are multiple options how to create and set up a neuron that is then registered as a know neuron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple options to create and set up a neuron that is then registered as a know neuron.
```

A known neuron can be operated by an individual person or an organization where one person controls the neuron
or it can be operated by a group of people.
Depending on this, different neuron creation options might be more suitable.

> ### Create a neuron controlled by one party

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a neuron controlled by one party
```

If you would like to create a known neuron that is operated by one party that knows the neuron's controlling key and can change the neuron, you can use one of the following options:

> * [Create the neuron on the NNS dapp](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Create the neuron on the NNS dapp](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron).
```

> * [Create the neuron on the NNS dapp but controlled by a hardware ledger wallet](https://support.dfinity.org/hc/en-us/articles/8760495850900-How-do-I-use-my-Ledger-Nano-with-the-Internet-Computer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Create the neuron on the NNS dapp that is controlled by a hardware ledger wallet](https://support.dfinity.org/hc/en-us/articles/8760495850900-How-do-I-use-my-Ledger-Nano-with-the-Internet-Computer)
```

> * [Create the neuron via the quill command line tool](https://support.dfinity.org/hc/en-us/articles/4408752586260-What-is-Quill)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Create the neuron via the quill command line tool](https://support.dfinity.org/hc/en-us/articles/4408752586260-What-is-Quill).
```

:::info

> If there are multiple people involved a know neuron's voting decision, the known neuron can be set up to follow their individual neurons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are multiple people involved in a know neuron's voting decision, the known neuron can be set up to follow their individual neurons
```

 on the topics that it should vote on.

> Note however that for a neuron which is created this way the **person who created the neuron has the controlling key**.
> This means that this person can modify the neuron and, in particular, can also vote in the name of the neuron without taking the input of others into account.
> This can be suitable for individuals who operate a known neuron or for organizations where one person is trusted with this task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, for a neuron which is created this way, the **person who created the neuron has the controlling key**.
This person can modify the neuron and, in particular, can also vote in the name of the neuron without taking the input of others into account.
This can be suitable for individuals who operate a known neuron, or for organizations where one person is trusted with this task.
```

:::

### Create a community neuron

> Additional information how to create a community neuron will follow soon!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional information on how to create a community neuron will be added soon!
```

### Present your neuron to the community

> A known neuron needs a name and a description. Often the owners of known neurons use the description part to present themselves a little.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A known neuron needs a name and a description. Often, the owners of known neurons use the description part to present themselves to the community.
```

> There are no rules of course, but it can make sense for neuron owners to present themselves to the community already before submitting
>  the proposal to register the known neuron. This can serve as a way for promoting a neuron and explaining the motivation behind it.
> This can, for example, be done with a forum post or by sharing information on social media, such as OpenChat or X.
> It might be useful to share the following information with others, so that followers can make well-informed decisions who to follow for which topic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are no rules that a known neuron must follow regarding if it presents itself to the community or not, but it can make sense for neuron owners to present themselves before submitting the proposal to register themselves as a known neuron. This can serve as a way for promoting the neuron and explaining the motivation behind it.
This can, for example, be done with a forum post or by sharing information on social media, such as OpenChat or X.
It might be useful to share the following information with the community, so that followers can make well-informed decisions regarding who to follow for which topic:
```

> * **Who you are**: Name of the person or group and their relationship to the ICP. You may want to argue why the people behind the neuron have a long-term interest in the wellbeing of the ICP and are therefore motivated to make good voting decisions.
> * **Neuron control**: How controls the neuron? Does it have a single controller or can it only be changed by a group of people?
> * **Covered topics**: A description of what topics the known neuron will vote on. Does the neuron commit to always vote on these topics?
> Since following is done based on proposal topics, this is relevant information for followers.
> Usually, neurons would want to follow other neurons neurons that always vote on a given topic in order not to miss out on [voting rewards](./staking-voting-rewards.mdx).
> * **Depth of reviews**: A description of how the known neuron plans to verify proposals. To which depth will it review the code or the content of the proposal and how is this done?
> * **Following setting**: For the topics where the know neuron does not vote directly, who does the neuron follow?
> * **Voting principles**: What are the principles according to which you plan to vote.
> * **Link to the neuron ID / proposal**: If you already created the neuron, you may want to provide its ID or even link to a dashboard where it can be inspected. The same holds for the proposal to register it as a know neuron in the case where the proposal was already made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Who you are**: Name of the person or group and their relationship to the ICP. You may want to argue why the people behind the neuron have a long-term interest in the wellbeing of the ICP and are, therefore, motivated to make good voting decisions.
* **Neuron control**: Who controls the neuron? Does it have a single controller or can it only be changed by a group of people?
* **Covered topics**: A description of what topics the known neuron will vote on. Does the neuron commit to always vote on these topics? Since following is done based on proposal topics, this is relevant information for followers. Usually, neurons would want to follow other neurons that always vote on a given topic in order not to miss out on [voting rewards](./staking-voting-rewards.mdx).
* **Depth of reviews**: A description of how the known neuron plans to verify proposals. To which depth will it review the code or the content of the proposal and how is this done?
* **Following setting**: For the topics where the know neuron does not vote directly, who does the neuron follow?
* **Voting principles**: What are the principles according to which you plan to vote?
* **Link to the neuron ID / proposal**: If you already created the neuron, you may want to provide its ID or even link to a dashboard where it can be inspected. The same holds for the proposal to register it as a know neuron in the case where the proposal was already made.
```

:::info

> There are no rules how a know neuron has to vote. However, due to the above reasons, it might be useful for known neurons to **focus on fewer topics and commit to always vote on those** rather than trying to cover a lot of topics and vote less reliably. For example, they could become experts on some proposal topics. If a known neuron commits to always vote on a certain topic it might be more likely that others follow the neuron on this topic as the followers want to make sure they are not missing out on rewards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are no rules regarding how a known neuron has to vote. However, due to the above reasons, it might be useful for known neurons to **focus on fewer topics and commit to always vote on those** rather than trying to cover a lot of topics and vote less reliably. For example, they could become experts on some proposal topics. If a known neuron commits to always vote on a certain topic, it might be more likely that others follow the neuron on this topic as the followers want to make sure they are not missing out on rewards.
```

:::

### Register the known neuron
To register a neuron as a know neuron, you need to submit a NNS proposal. The proposal can be submitted by any neuron that has at
least 10 ICP staked.

> For simplicity, we assume in the following that the neuron to be registered was created on the NNS dapp and that the same neuron is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we assume in the following example that the neuron to be registered was created on the NNS dapp and that the same neuron is
```

used to submit the proposal.

> **1. Get DFX**
> It is not possible to submit proposals through the NNS Dapp. Therefore, use a command line tool called DFX.
> Unfortunately, DFX is only natively supported on Mac and Linux, but it can be installed on Windows as well by following the [instructions for installing DFX on all platforms](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install/#installing-dfx).
> 
> Here a copy of the instructions for Mac and Linux for simplicity:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**1. Download and install `dfx`**
It is not possible to submit proposals through the NNS dapp. Therefore, you must use a command line tool called `dfx`.`dfx` is only natively supported on Mac and Linux, but it can be installed on Windows using WSL. 

To install `dfx`, follow the [installation instructions](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install/#installing-dfx).

Here are the instructions for Mac and Linux:
```

```bash
sh -ci "$(curl -fsSL https://internetcomputer.org/install.sh)"
```

If you are using a machine running Apple silicon, you will need to have [Rosetta](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT211861) installed.
You can install Rosetta by running `softwareupdate --install-rosetta` in your terminal.

> **2. Add your dfx principal as a hotkey to your neuron**
> Your neuron is controlled by a "principal ID", which an identity on the ICP, that is only available on the NNS dapp.
> However, you want to be able to submit proposals from the command line on your computer in this neuron's name.
> For this, you can register the principal that you have on your computer as a
> [**hot keys**](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/neuron-management#neuron-attributes)
> of the neuron. Hot keys have the permission to vote and submit proposals for the neuron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**2. Add your `dfx` principal as a hotkey to your neuron**
Your neuron is controlled by a **principal ID**, which is an identity on ICP.
However, you want to be able to submit proposals from the command line on your computer in this neuron's name.
For this, you can register the principal that you have on your computer as a
[**hot key**](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/neuron-management#neuron-attributes)
of the neuron. Hot keys have the permission to vote and submit proposals for the neuron.
```

> Run `dfx identity get-principal` to get the principal ID that corresponds to your computer. We will calls this your "dfx principal".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `dfx identity get-principal` to get the principal ID that corresponds to your current [developer identity](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/accounts). The following steps will refer to this as your "dfx principal".
```

It should output some text that looks something like this: `hnswe-crhc7-funvc-qqkg4-pk3j4-vxfhs-ckf2o-i56yb-frent-vl7vk-3qe`.

> Then, go back to the NNS dapp, on the neuron staking page, and click “Add Hotkey” on the staking page for your neuron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, go back to the NNS dapp. On the "Neuron Staking" page, click “Add Hotkey” on for your neuron.
```

You may need to scroll down a bit. Once you’ve clicked “Add Hotkey”, paste your dfx principal into the window that appears,
and press confirm.
Your dfx principal should appear under “Hotkeys”.

> Congrats, now you can control your neuron from your computer!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now control your neuron from the local terminal.
```

**3. Submit the proposal**

> To submit the proposal, you need the neuron ID of the neuron to be registered as known neuron, a name for the known neuron, and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To submit the proposal, you need the neuron ID of the neuron to be registered as a known neuron, a name for the known neuron, and a
```

 short description.

>  You find your neuron ID in the NNS dapp, at the top right of the NNS dashboard page for your neuron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 You find your neuron ID in the NNS dapp at the top right of the NNS dashboard page for your neuron.
```

>  To submit the proposal, customize the following template in a text editor, then run it!
>  You can run it by pasting each line into your terminal one at a time, but some terminals will let you paste them all at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To submit the proposal, customize the following template in a text editor, then run it!

You can run it by pasting the customized template into your terminal.
```

```

Here is a concrete example for reference:
```
NEURON_ID="12664007384337444895"
NEW_NAME="Testname"
NEW_DESCRIPTION="I like the NNS DAO"
PROPOSAL_TITLE="Make $NEURON_ID a known neuron (${NEW_NAME})"
PROPOSAL_SUMMARY="Hi everyone. I would like to become a known neuron. Find more information about me on the linked forum post."
PROPOSAL_URL="https://forum.dfinity.org/link-to-post/3074"
dfx canister --network ic call rrkah-fqaaa-aaaaa-aaaaq-cai manage_neuron "( record { id = opt record { id = ${NEURON_ID}: nat64}; command = opt variant { MakeProposal = record { title = opt \"${PROPOSAL_TITLE}\"; url = \"${PROPOSAL_URL}\"; summary = \"${PROPOSAL_SUMMARY}\"; action = opt variant {RegisterKnownNeuron = record {id = opt record { id = ${NEURON_ID}: nat64}; known_neuron_data = opt record {name = \"${NEW_NAME}\"; description = opt \"${NEW_DESCRIPTION}\"}}}}}})"

```

After running this command, you should see something like this:
```
(
  record {
    command = opt variant {
      MakeProposal = record {
        message = opt "The proposal has been created successfully.";
        proposal_id = opt record { id = 129_666 : nat64 };
      }
    };
  },
)

```

> What you see after `id =` is the ID of the proposal you just submitted and which other NNS neuron owners can now vote on!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What you see after `id =` is the ID of the proposal you just submitted, which other NNS neuron owners can now vote on!
```

In order for some neurons to follow others, there need to be some voting neurons that can be followed.
There are at least two ways how neurons to follow can be found and set in a neuron:
* A user with an actively voting neuron who is offering to be followed can communicate their neuron ID to others, for example on the forum or their website. Other neurons can then [follow them](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#step-5-enter-a-neuron-id-to-follow-or-select-a-group-of-neurons-from-the-menu-provided) using this neuron ID.
* A user with an actively voting neuron who is offering to be followed can register a **known neuron**, also called **named neuron**, in the NNS governance canister. Neurons who would like to follow others can see a list of all registered neurons with their name and optionally a short description and can just select one of them to follow (without having to remember an ID).

### How to become a known neuron

Create a neuron: https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron
Register your neuron as a known neurons with a name and a description

> - Submit a proposal:

Author: TODO

If you would like to create a known neuron that is operated by one party that knows the neuron's controlling key and can change the neuron, you can use one of the following options:
* [Create the neuron on the NNS dapp](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/nns/nns-app-quickstart#stake-icp-utility-tokens-in-a-neuron).
* Create the neuron on the NNS dapp but controlled by a hardware ledger wallet. //TODO: link??
* Create the neuron via the quill command line tool. //TODO: link??

If you would like to create a decentralized know neuron operated by a group, where no single member can change the neuron without agreement from others, you can use one of the following options:
* Create a neuron that is controlled by a canister which is governed by a DAO. (Note: in the future canister-controlled neurons might get less rewards. This is something still discussed with the community but should be accountd for when choosing the neuron setup.)

> * Create a neuron for which no one knows the controlling key and which is operated only by manage-neuron proposals.

Author: @Dfinity-Bjoern didn't we have some "unofficial" documentation of how this should / could be done in some forum post? I think you mentioned this at some point but that it might also be outdated?
